
## Java Inner Classes


Java inner class or nested class is a class which is declared inside the class or interface.

We use inner classes to logically group classes and interfaces in one place so that it can be more readable and maintainable.

Additionally, it can access all the members of outer class including private data members and methods.


### Syntax of Inner class

```
class Java_Outer_class{  
 //code  
 class Java_Inner_class{  
  //code  
 }  
} 
```

### Advantage of java inner classes

There are basically three advantages of inner classes in java. They are as follows:

1) Nested classes represent a special type of relationship that is it can access all the members (data members and methods) of outer class including private.

2) Nested classes are used to develop more readable and maintainable code because it logically group classes and interfaces in one place only.

3) Code Optimization: It requires less code to write.


### Difference between nested class and inner class in Java

Inner class is a part of nested class. Non-static nested classes are known as inner classes. 


### Types of Nested classes

There are two types of nested classes non-static and static nested classes.The non-static nested classes are also known as inner classes.

    Non-static nested class (inner class)
        Member inner class
        Anonymous inner class
        Local inner class
    Static nested class


|   Type	|   Description |
| ------------- | ------------- | 
|   Member Inner Class	|   A class created within class and outside method.    |
|   Anonymous Inner Class	|   A class created for implementing interface or extending class. Its name is decided by the java compiler.    |
|   Local Inner Class	|   A class created within method.  |
|   Static Nested Class	|   A static class created within class.    |
|   Nested Interface	|   An interface created within class or interface. |


## Java Member inner class

A non-static class that is created inside a class but outside a method is called member inner class.

Syntax:

```
    class Outer{  
     //code  
     class Inner{  
      //code  
     }  
    }  
```


### ava Member inner class example

In this example, we are creating msg() method in member inner class that is accessing the private data member of outer class.

```
    class TestMemberOuter1{  
     private int data=30;  
     class Inner{  
      void msg(){System.out.println("data is "+data);}  
     }  
     public static void main(String args[]){  
      TestMemberOuter1 obj=new TestMemberOuter1();  
      TestMemberOuter1.Inner in=obj.new Inner();  
      in.msg();  
     }  
    }  
```

output : data is 30


### Internal working of Java member inner class

The java compiler creates two class files in case of inner class. The class file name of inner class is "Outer$Inner". If you want to instantiate inner class, you must have to create the instance of outer class. In such case, instance of inner class is created inside the instance of outer class.


### Internal code generated by the compiler

The java compiler creates a class file named Outer$Inner in this case. The Member inner class have the reference of Outer class that is why it can access all the data members of Outer class including private.

```
    import java.io.PrintStream;  
    class Outer$Inner  
    {  
        final Outer this$0;  
        Outer$Inner()  
        {   super();  
            this$0 = Outer.this;  
        }  
        void msg()  
        {  
            System.out.println((new StringBuilder()).append("data is ")  
                        .append(Outer.access$000(Outer.this)).toString());  
        }  
    }  
```


## Java Anonymous inner class

A class that have no name is known as anonymous inner class in java. It should be used if you have to override method of class or interface. Java Anonymous inner class can be created by two ways:

    Class (may be abstract or concrete).
    Interface

### Java anonymous inner class example using class

```
    abstract class Person{  
      abstract void eat();  
    }  
    class TestAnonymousInner{  
     public static void main(String args[]){  
      Person p=new Person(){  
      void eat(){System.out.println("nice fruits");}  
      };  
      p.eat();  
     }  
    }  
```


output : nice fruits


### Internal working of given code